Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
VETERANS ARE ALL AROUND US IN THE BRAZIS VALLEY.
FOR EXAMPLE, ARNOLD FULTERMAN AND HIS WIFE MINNIE HAVE BEEN MARRIED 56 YEARS AND THEY'VE LIVED MOST OF THAT TIME IN THEIR EAST 25TH STREET HOME IN BRIAN.
ARNOLD WORKED 41 YEARS FOR THE PHONE COMPANY BEFORE HE RETIRED, BUT BEFORE ANY OF THAT, HE SERVED AS AN INFANTRYMAN IN PATTON'S 3RD ARMY, 80TH DIVISION, A VETERAN OF THE BATTLE OF THE BULGE.
HE SAW PLENTY IN THE EUROPEAN CAMPAIGN.
just a doughboy fighting for his country.
And it's our pleasure to welcome Arnold Folterman to Veterans of the Valley.
Welcome, PFC Folterman, and thank you very much for your service.
I want to talk about your growing up.
You are a Brazos Valley boy, for sure.
You grew up in Washington County and on a farm between Lyons and Caldwell with your family.
And sort of take us from there and sort of getting into the Army.
You actually went into the Army in 1943, right?
1943, reported for active duty on
July the 5th, 1943.
Uh-huh.
And you went to Fort Sam Houston, as a lot of soldiers back then went.
That was your first exposure to the Army.
Sort of talk about what that was like.
And for a young kid, you were probably a little bit frightened about what you were in for, weren't you?
Well, I just floated along.
And the train ride was the longest I'd ever been on.
Right.
It went all the way to
I think Los Angeles, California, and then we were bused to Camp Callen, California.
Right.
That's where you went to 40 millimeter anti-aircraft training.
I guess they were trying to find the spot where you were going to work best to serve the country, and anti-aircraft was the first.
And then it was just sort of a series of places where you got more training after Camp Callen, right?
Yeah, they had to do something with me.
And so they just put me in that anti-aircraft thing for training.
Right.
Where'd you go after Camp Cali?
You went to Fort Bliss and then where?
Fort Bliss, Texas.
And we spent 16 weeks there.
And after we completed our, and we had infantry training then in half tracks with quad 50 caliber machine guns.
Right.
And then we moved from there to Camp Chaffee, Arkansas.
Talk about the train ride to Camp Chaffee, Arkansas, because then some of the things that you saw on the way, you got kind of close to home, and you didn't even know it, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, I woke up one morning, and we were in some old railroad coaches, and had the windows open.
And I happened to be right in the window, so I leaned out and looked out, and what did I see?
Dime box, Texas.
Then Collowell, Texas, and the train went on to Hearn.
Right.
And we stopped there and had a 30-minute exercise in the freight yards.
I see.
So you were pretty close to home.
Oh, yeah.
Just going from one place to another.
12 miles.
Collowell is about 12 miles from where I live.
Went to Camp Chaffee, spent about 16 weeks there, advanced infantry training, and then finally to Maryland to Camp Miles Standish.
Talk about what you were trained there, what you trained there for before you went over to Europe.
Camp Miles-Stanish, we had an actually
infantry live fire exercise that consisted of actually firing M1 rifles as we advanced one squad over the other squad.
And it was quite an experience.
I bet it was.
I wonder why we hadn't shot up half of our group, but they had it worked out pretty well.
Indeed.
And then you went overseas and that was an experience in itself.
I know that there were a lot of people that went over to Europe and they had the pleasure of
being in some converted nice boats, but you didn't.
You were on an old freighter.
Is that right, going into 10 days?
It was a combination freighter and troop transport.
About 500 men?
It was, I think, around 500 men that they had down in the hole of that ship, and air conditioning and the air system wasn't too good, and everybody was seasick.
Oh, my goodness.
And the smell of hot, smelly, greasy smell coming out of that kitchen would just make you sick before you ever got there.
I don't think I ate over two meals after I got on it.
So you had 10 days of that, 10 days because you were actually in a naval convoy, is that right?
Yeah, right.
Yeah, so you must have felt like you were already in combat just going overseas.
Well, I felt terrible.
After you left the States, I know you told me the other day that you pretty much lost.
You just sort of went wherever they took you.
You landed somewhere in England.
You're not sure where.
But it was there that you met up with the 80th Division, and then that's where you were.
in England before you went?
No, I was in a replacement depot.
Then we boarded a ship and crossed the English Channel and disembarked into the landing craft and landed on Omaha Beach.
Of course, it was already secured at that time.
From there, we were trucked to an assembly point close to La Harve.
And from there, we were put in groups and then sent out as a replacement to certain divisions.
And I happened to wind up in the 80th.
And that's where you wound up in the 80th.
So I got you in the 80th a little bit too early.
Talk about the crossing of the English Channel and going into Omaha Beach, did you?
You all had already known at the time about D-Day and what was up, the invasion of Normandy, and this was going to be the last push towards the end of the war in Europe.
But did you know specifically what you were going to be doing once you got to France?
No.
No, I just knew I'd be in an infantry outfit somewhere.
Right.
I had no idea as to what division or anything like that.
Yeah.
It was about that time after you got over there that you took what turned out to be your last shower for a while, right?
Last bath, excuse me.
No, that was a bath in a stream in a farmer's field.
Right.
Cold water.
They divided us into company strengths.
So there was a whole company of GIs out there in the nude in this cold water taking a bath before.
But it was refreshing.
Yeah, I bet it was.
Yeah, and if you'd known it was the last one you were going to have for a while, you'd have known how refreshing.
I know you wrote a story about your service in Europe, and one thing that you wrote was about the dead cows.
Yeah.
You wrote about that.
Talk about that and what that was all about.
Well, I couldn't figure why there were so many dead cows laying around.
They were big Holstein, dairy-type cows that had been killed, but...
At night, sometimes the Germans had used cows to infiltrate our lines.
Well, after this development, well, they just, whenever there was something going on out there, they would call in an artillery strike.
And poor old cows was the ones that got in the way.
Got most of the damage.
Right, right, because at night.
You couldn't see.
They didn't know whether it was personnel, whether it was troops or
Sometimes it turned out to be cattle, right?
And that was the blackest nights I've ever seen in my life.
You could almost touch your nose before you could see your hand.
Wow.
Your job there was in ammunition and a pioneer platoon.
What was a pioneer platoon?
It was actually a miniature engineering platoon that did the dirty work.
Digging ditches.
Packing stuff around.
Piggybacking.
Packed muleing wherever they needed stuff to go.
Right.
Now, this is a unit I understand that before you got there had one of the reasons they needed replacement because they had been under pretty heavy attack and it had some significant casualties.
Yes, at Pontemuson Hill, the regiment battalion suffered pretty heavy casualties.
That's the reason that we went in there.
Right, right.
After this, I believe you moved to the Seal River, crossed the Seal River, and you were pretty much in a defensive mode, sort of?
Talk about what you were doing.
Before we crossed the Seal.
We crossed the Moselle, but we had not crossed the Seal River.
I understand.
And we sat for about 10 days, I think.
on the west side of the Seal River while they brought in supplies and stuff and replenished the troops that we had lost again.
And then we moved out to cross the Seal River.
And when we got orders to cross the Seal River, we moved out and we waded water for most of the night.
It was about a mile long.
and that water was anywhere from ankle deep to armpit deep.
But we stayed on a little road that we could see
the outline of a roadway fence.
And we had one little short guy that he had to hold on to the tall guys because his pack would pick him up and float him off.
But anyway, we got there and we surprised the Germans because they didn't think we would move out in weather conditions like that.
and you're getting pretty close to winter time so i imagine that going across that river was pretty cold it was it was cold oh yeah it was cold you're talking about what november november somewhere first parts from the first part of november right seventh or eighth or somewhere along right in uh 1944 right right where this is before uh you move on to luxembourg and the battle of the falls but before that you told a story about i believe one of your uh
Captain Chitwood had asked you to go along to inspect a cemetery and a church tower, a church bell tower.
Sort of talk about that and what that was about.
Well, we had moved into this town and as we got into the town it was getting dark.
By the time it got dark, we got in a bunch of artillery or mortar fire or something.
It was pretty heavy.
Anyway, it was
It was pretty well localized in one area of the town.
And somebody figured out that, well, they had an artillery spotter somewhere, and it wasn't anything falling close to this church or cemetery.
So Captain Chitwood was the commanding officer of the I&R Platoon and Reconnaissance
Intelligence and Reconnaissance Platoon.
I don't know why he came and got me, but he got me and we went out and went all through the cemetery.
And those cemeteries had big crypts and stuff.
And we went around and checked all the doors on that.
And then he went up into the bell tower of the church while I was posted on guard at the base of the stairway.
But there was nobody there.
But then I found out why the next morning.
In the meantime, the field artillery, some field artillery unit, was bringing in a humongous artillery piece.
It was a 280-millimeter gun, and they were setting that thing up
outside of this town well we went back to where we was in the buildings and the next morning before daybreak well they fired that thing oh my goodness and it just literally blew the roof off of the building that we was in we thought we done had it again yes sir but it that the gun they tell me was capable of firing this 280 millimeter
projectile, a distance of approximately 30 miles.
Right, right, right.
I want to go back after you backtrack a little bit.
After you crossed the Moselle River, you said that there was an incident at that time where your truck had gotten bogged down.
It had been raining quite a bit, got bogged down in the mud, and you thought that was one of the scarier times for you because you thought that you might have been ahead at that time.
Talk about
That and what your thoughts were again.
Well, we usually didn't try to bring vehicles into the towns.
They'd try to conceal them in the woods or something, and they turned off the highway just before we got into this little town of Brat, France.
Right.
And the driver got up a ways in the mud, and then his truck stalled, and he couldn't go forward anymore.
And in the meantime, the Germans decided that was a prime target,
And it was just me and the old truck driver there.
And the motor pool officer's jeep driver was down on the road.
Well, the truck driver was wounded, but he was able to back his truck out of there and take it on down into the town.
Well, the jeep driver lost his life out there on the road.
And that was...
Pretty weird feeling because you didn't know which way to go, whether you should run forward, backwards, or sideways.
Right.
And I finally went back to the town and joined up with my group that was in town.
And your truck had been set on fire and inside of it was your only pair of breeches, right?
That's right, yeah.
Everything else I had, I didn't have anything.
So you wore the same pair of pants for what, about three months or so?
Yeah, just about from September, well, longer than that.
When I left England, all the way till the 6th of December.
Right, because the 6th of December was when you got a little bit of a break, you'd been
in enemy contact for 102 straight days.
So you went to a town in France and got fresh clothes and you finally got a shower, right?
That's right.
That must have felt good.
Oh, it did.
Probably your most memorable shower, right?
Shortest five minutes I ever spent in my life because that's all the time we were having that shower.
That's all the time you had.
But then you got orders to go to Luxembourg, and that meant what you would soon or later find out would be the Battle of the Bulge.
When I have spoken to veterans who were involved in the Battle of the Bulge, the first thing they talk about is the weather, and they talk about how cold it was.
They say it is the coldest that they have ever been before or since.
I assume you would agree with that, right?
I sure do.
Yeah.
How'd you keep yourself from freezing?
We had orders to go and relieve another infantry division, but while we were in transit into their positions and they were coming out, orders were changed, and we loaded back on the quartermaster trucks, and it was drizzling rain, as it usually did over there.
We loaded on these trucks, and, well, we didn't know where it was going or nothing.
Just get back on the trucks.
And so when we got all loaded up,
The order came down from truck driver to truck driver.
He turned on full headlights on all trucks.
And we hadn't seen a bright light in eight months, 10 months or longer.
And that prompted some real comments as to what they thought General Patton was trying to kill all of us.
But in the finale, it was a good move
because he knew that there was a big snowstorm coming, that the Germans couldn't fly and observe us or anything.
So that's the reason he had the truck driver turn on the lights and he could move that convoy out.
Yeah, and he went 150 miles in 10 hours, which was moving for a convoy that size, right?
Yeah, full division, yeah.
And you wouldn't have been able to do that without the lights.
Without the lights, no, we never would have made it.
Right.
And that gave us an opportunity to get into position in Luxembourg where we should be at least a day ahead of what the Germans had anticipated that we would be there.
So we were sitting there waiting for them, ready when the artillery had zeroed in on the roads and all that stuff.
Right.
Arnold, I asked you the other day if you were wounded in World War II, and you told me about something very superficial, but you said that you went to a first aid station, and what you found there, you just decided just to turn around and go away.
Sorry to talk about that.
I wasn't that bad off.
Yeah.
You had just in your back, you'd been burned by something.
You're not sure what?
Something penetrated in the deep blood.
I don't know what it was.
Right.
But you went to the first aid station and you found, you realized immediately that compared to what you were seeing there that you weren't bad off.
So you just turned around and went back about your duty.
Yeah, I left.
And you just left.
I know that that's a time, obviously, that you remember and you'll recall.
Let's move on.
I want to look at some photographs now, if we can.
Some pictures that you gave us to use here that are in your home.
And some of the things we're going to see a picture of, we're going to be talking about in a little bit.
And you can see a photograph right there.
There is a young, raw Arnold Folterman.
When was this taken?
This was taken, actually, I guess, during your training, right?
It was probably around...
1943?
August sometime in 43, I guess.
Right.
Just a young, well-shaven, about to go.
I didn't have to shave.
Didn't have to shave back then.
I just rubbed pretty hard with a washcloth.
Well, that's a fine-looking soldier.
Okay, let's move on to the next photograph.
Look at this picture here.
This is a U and a G. Where was this taken from?
This is Maherkirchen, Austria.
Uh-huh.
This is later on.
We're going to be talking about this because later on after the Battle of the Bulge, you move to Austria.
Okay.
Move on to the next photograph.
We're going to talk about this and the German surrender as the war was coming to an end.
Isn't that what we're looking at right there?
Right.
That is a collection of the stuff that they brought with them when they surrendered.
The 6th German Army surrendered to our 3rd Army.
Right.
And they brought their vehicles and military equipment, and they were parked out in these valleys at Meierkirk in Austria.
Wow, that's quite a sight right there.
That's just a small part of it.
Just a small part of it.
Just a very small part of it.
Okay.
Move on.
We've got another one.
Talk about this.
This is towards the end of the year, and this is some of your buddies.
You're not in this picture, but this is some of your buddies kind of celebrating the impending end of the conflict.
That's right after we received the orders to cease all the...
All hostilities.
All hostilities would cease.
And the fellow on the left had found himself a stovepipe.
I never did learn what the guy's name was.
That's true in a lot of the cases.
You didn't know what the guy's name was because he didn't go into formation for roll call or anything.
But he was from Alabama.
That's what he went by, Alabama.
Alabama.
He was Alabama.
Okay, we've got a picture now from, actually, you go back, this is from your early training at Camp Callen, California, and this is actually just a section of a much wider picture.
This is probably only about a fourth of the people that were in that training group at Camp Callen, and you were sitting, bottom, almost the center.
You can see the black dot there, and that's you.
That's me.
It wasn't much of me.
I was a skinny kid.
You're a skinny kid, but they were probably going to take care of that, for sure.
Remember when that picture was taken?
That was in probably August, latter part of August.
We just, I think, had completed our basic training there in the 40 millimeter.
Of 1943?
Of 1943, yeah.
But I mean, I guess you can go back in your thoughts and probably remember assembling for that photograph, right?
And the fancy camera that took that wide, wide picture.
Well, no, I can't.
You can't deal with that many people together that early.
No, we were in so many formations.
Right.
And the ones I hated the worst was battalion parades.
Exactly.
Okay, move on.
We've got one more picture, and this is of your grandson.
Yes, sir.
Tell us his name and what he is doing right now.
It's Scott Fulton, and he's nearing the end of his training in the Marine Corps, and he is now in the training of what is equivalent to the Navy SEAL training.
It's a specialized group of boys.
Right.
Well, I know you're very proud of him.
Indeed.
I know you have 11 grandchildren and one great grandchild.
We'll talk about your family a little bit later, but let's go ahead and get, we were talking about some of the pictures and sort of where you went after you left the Battle of the Bulge in France, and you just sort of moved around and around, and you ended up in Austria, I know, and also in Nuremberg.
So sort of take us your travels after France and where you went from one place to the other, and especially in Austria.
Nuremberg, we just kind of passed through that and getting ready to relieve some other infantry division.
And from there, I think we went actually and made a river crossing in Brown Isle, Austria.
Right.
And that was the weirdest river crossing I ever... This was Hitler's birthplace.
It was Adolf's birthplace.
And when we got there, the burgemeister had the whole town fall out
and greet us on the opposite banks of the Inns River.
Just opened the gates.
There was no hostility to whatever.
Just coming down to the end of the war.
And I know later that you went to another place in Austria and actually
some German troops were surrendering to you all.
They were anxious to surrender.
They wanted to surrender because that was sort of their safe haven from the Russians who were still carrying out the hostilities.
Yeah, after Austria and at the end of the war, we pulled back to Brownau.
And that's when the German 6th Army surrendered.
And we sit there for about three days, I guess, and did nothing but guide traffic to bring these soldiers into a certain area.
Right.
Then after that, we'd process them.
And one of my duties was to see that they all got a burr haircut.
I confiscated all knives, cameras.
Went through their baggage.
Went through their baggage and then saw that they were dusted for life before they would be moved on to another station and shipped back to wherever they sent them to.
Indeed.
So that was a part of your job.
And I know that...
Later on, you went to another place, I believe, in Austria to where you got treated pretty well.
You were in a high-rise hotel until the army found out how much it was costing them to keep you there, right?
Yeah, that was after we finished discharging all the Germans.
They moved us to Czechoslovakia.
And the Marian, what we called it, Mariansky-Lazny.
Right.
Marianbad, English pronunciation.
And the town was made up of 26 high-rise hotels.
And they were not damaged at all during the war.
And we stayed in those for about a month.
And then somebody figured it was a little too expensive for you to be treated that way.
So they moved us out to an old beat-up PW camp.
Well, it was nice while it lasted, right?
Oh, yeah.
I enjoyed it.
Later on, you went to another town that was actually housed a Hitler Youth School.
Right.
It was a Hitler Youth School.
But it had been being used for something else.
Is that right?
Or it was a youth school at the time?
That's what we were using it for.
Oh, that's what you were using it for.
Right.
I see.
Yeah.
Adolf had a school for his underlings, you know.
youngster that he was training for military and stuff.
So it was set up, an ideal set up for an infantry unit.
Arlie, you finally got to go home in late 1945.
You were discharged in January of 1946.
You finally got to Caldwell, but it was late one night, and where'd you spend your first night at home?
No, I spent the first night sleeping on the Santa Fe Railroad.
On the bench at the train station.
At the train station.
In Caldwell.
Because there's no buses running.
I didn't know anybody.
It was a dry place.
Welcome home.
Thank you.
But then you went on home to Lyons the next day.
The next morning I called a bus out.
The next morning.
You worked at a grocery in Lyons and then eventually at a service station just right here in Bryan around Texas and 30th Street for a while.
Is that right?
And then you worked for the telephone company for a year.
We've got about a minute left.
I want you to talk about your family.
You and Manny, like we said, have been married for 56 years.
And I know that you've had four children.
You tragically lost your oldest daughter, Karen, about seven years ago.
But you have two sons and another daughter.
Who are they and what do they do?
My oldest son, Keith, lives in Robertson County.
He worked for the state as a game warden for around 24, 25 years.
He retired, and now he's working for the Sheriff's Department in Robertson County.
Right, and another son?
Kirby works at Texas Digitals College Station.
Right.
Don't ask me what Texas Digitals is.
And you've got a daughter, Kim, right?
Kim.
And she works at First National Bank.
Works at First National Bank.
All right.
I know you're proud of them and the 11 grandchildren and the great-grandchild.
And thank you for your service.
We're out of time.
Thank you.
Arnold Folterman's story is the most common type of those young men who gave their most vital years to serve our country and came home.
He followed orders, risked his life almost daily, served alongside others who lost theirs, and wonders why his was spared.
We salute Arnold Folterman of Bryan for his service as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbeville, and join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
All right, I'm ready whenever they say.
Okay, here we go.
We're going for 30 seconds here, right?
Okay.
The doughboys of World War II just did their job, did it well.
Arnold Fulterman of Bryan was one of those, serving Patton's Third Army as a member of the 80th Infantry Division, a soldier on the ground in defense of his country.
Hi, I'm Tom Turbyville, and I want you to meet Arnold Fulterman on Veterans of the Valley.
It's Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU-TV.